A Terradynamics of Legged Locomotion on Granular Media
Chen Li1,2 , Tingnan Zhang1 , and Daniel I. Goldman1∗
1

arXiv:1303.7065v1 [physics.bio-ph] 28 Mar 2013

2

School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA
Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California, 94720, USA
∗
Corresponding author. E-mail: daniel.goldman@physics.gatech.edu

The theories of aero- and hydrodynamics predict animal movement and device design in air
and water through the computation of lift, drag,
and thrust forces. Although models of terrestrial
legged locomotion have focused on interactions
with solid ground, many animals move on substrates that flow in response to intrusion. However, locomotor-ground interaction models on
such flowable ground are often unavailable. We
developed a force model for arbitrarily-shaped
legs and bodies moving freely in granular media,
and used this “terradynamics” to predict a small
legged robot’s locomotion on granular media using various leg shapes and stride frequencies. Our
study reveals a complex but generic dependence
of stresses in granular media on intruder depth,
orientation, and movement direction and gives insight into the effects of leg morphology and kinematics on movement.
The locomotion of animals (1) and devices (2–4)
emerges from the effective interaction of bodies and/or
appendages with an environment. For flying in air and
swimming in water, there is a history of theoretical predictive models (3–5) to describe the complex interactions
between the locomotor and the surrounding fluids, based
on the fundamental equations for fluid flow, the NavierStokes equations. These models have not only allowed
understanding of the movement of a variety of aerial and
aquatic organisms (5) [such as bacteria and spermatazoa
(6), insects (7), birds (8), and fish and whales (9)] and
their functional morphology, evolution, and ecology (9,
10), but also advanced the engineering design of aircraft
(3), marine vehicles (4), and flying (11) and swimming
(12) robots. For running and walking on ground, studies
using solid ground such as running tracks and treadmills
have inspired general models (13, 14); building on these
models, researchers have begun to apply dynamical systems theory (15). In these studies, the leg-ground interaction was often approximated as a point contact on a
rigid, flat, and nonslip ground (13–15).
Many small legged animals (16–19) [and increasingly
robots (20–23)] face the challenges of moving on natural
substrates such as sand (16, 17, 21), gravel (16, 20), rubble (20), soil (20, 22),mud (17, 20), snow (18, 20), grass
(20, 22), and leaf litter (19, 20, 22), which, unlike solid
ground, can flow during movement when a yield stress is
exceeded. The complexity of the interactions with such
flowable ground may rival or even exceed that during

movement in fluids. For example, recent studies of legged
animals (16) and robots (21) moving on granular media
[collections of particles (24)] such as sand and gravel (Fig.
1, A and B) have demonstrated that at an instant of time
during a step, each element of a leg moves through the
substrate at a specific depth, orientation, and movement
direction, all of which can change over time (16, 21). Furthermore, the leg interacts with a material that can display both solid-like and fluid-like features (24) (Fig. 1, C
and D). Compared to the theories of aero- and hydrodynamics, predictive models are less well developed for calculating forces and predicting legged locomotion on such
flowable ground (16, 21). Research in the field of terramechanics (2) has advanced the mobility of off-road vehicles
on flowable ground such as sand and soil. These models
were developed for large wheeled and tracked vehicles,
which sink only slightly into the substrate (2, 25). Thus,
in terramechanical models, interaction with the ground
is approximated as the indentation of a horizontal, flat,
rectangular plate (2, 25). It was a breakdown of this flatplate approximation, however, that led to overpredicted

FIG. 1. Examples of legged locomotion on flowable ground.
(A) A zebra-tailed lizard running on sand (16). (B) A biologically inspired RHex robot (22) walking on dirt [Photo
credit: Galen Clark Haynes, Aaron M. Johnson, and Daniel
E. Koditschek, University of Pennsylvania]. Dashed boxes
in (A) and (B) indicate the regions of leg-ground interaction
shown in (C) and (D). Schematic of leg-ground interaction for
(C) a hind foot of a zebra-tailed lizard (16) and (D) a c-leg of
a RHex robot (21) during a step on granular media. Dashed,
solid, and dotted tracings are leg positions at early, mid-, and
late stance. Bars and arrows indicate local orientations and
movement directions of leg elements. The gray area is the
granular substrate.

2
speeds for small vehicles such as the Mars rovers, whose
small wheels have substantially curved ground contact
interfaces (25). Because leg-ground interaction on flowable substrates is a more diverse, complex, and dynamic
process (16, 21) than the flat-plate indentation, terramechanics is not expected to apply to legged locomotors on
flowable ground (2).
Granular materials such as sand and gravel (24), home
to a variety of small desert animals (16, 17, 26), have
proved to be a promising model substrate for studying
legged locomotion on flowable ground (16, 21). Despite
their diversity in particle size, shape, density, friction,
polydispersity, and compaction (24), dry granular media are relatively simple as compared to media such as
soil and mud, because granular particles interact purely
through dissipative, repulsive contact forces and have no
cohesion (24). In addition, the penetration resistance of
granular media can be repeatably controlled using laboratory apparatus such as an air-fluidized bed (16, 21,
26).
To begin to create a “terradynamics” that allows the
prediction of legged locomotion on a flowable ground, we
hypothesized that the net forces on a leg (or a body)
moving in a granular medium in the vertical plane could
be approximated by the linear superposition of resistive
forces on infinitesimal leg (or body) elements. Our hypothesis was inspired by our recent success in applying
the methods of resistive force theory (6) to predict the
forces and movement during the limbless locomotion of a
lizard swimming in sand (26) and in describing the drag
(26, 27) and lift (27) on simple objects moving in granular media at fixed depths. In these studies, the linear
superposition was valid for intruders moving in granular media in the horizontal plane at low enough speeds
[for example, ≤ 0.5 m/s for 0.3-mm glass particles (26)],
where intrusion forces are dominated by particle friction
(insensitive to speed) and non-inertial (26). However, it
was unclear whether linear superposition could apply to
legs (or bodies) of complex morphology and kinematics
moving in the vertical plane.
To measure resistive forces for leg elements, we moved
a thin rigid plate (of area A) in granular media in the
vertical plane at 1 cm/s and measured lift fz and drag
fx on the plate (in the continuously yielding regime). We
determined vertical and horizontal stresses σz,x = fz,x /A
as a function of the plate’s depth |z| below the surface,
angle of attack β, and angle of intrusion γ (Fig. 2A and
movie S1) (28). To test the generality of our resistive
force model, we used three dry granular media of various particle size, shape, density, and friction, prepared
into flat, naturally occurring, loosely and closely packed
states (16, 21, 26) (supplementary text section 2, fig. S3,
and table S1). Slightly polydispersed near-spherical glass
particles 0.3 and 3 mm in diameter [covering the particle
size range of natural dry sand (∼0.1 to ∼1 mm) (29)] and
rounded, slightly kidney-shaped poppy seeds (0.7 mm in

diameter) allowed us to probe general principles for naturally occurring granular media of high sphericity and
roundness [such as Ottawa sand (30)]. We discuss at the
end of the paper possible effects of particle nonsphericity
and angularity also found in many natural sands (30).
In all media tested, we observed that for all attack
angles β and intrusion angles γ, σz,x were nearly proportional to depth |z| when the plate was fully submerged
and far from the bottom of the container (Fig. 2B and
movie S1). This is because friction-dominated forces are
proportional to the hydrostatic-like pressure in granu-

FIG. 2. Measurement of resistive forces in granular media
in the vertical plane using a plate element (28). (A) Lift fz
(blue arrow) and drag fx (green arrow) on a thin rigid plate
of area A moving in granular media (gray area) in the vertical plane at speed v = 1 cm/s were measured as a function
of the plate’s depth |z| below the surface, angle of attack β,
and angle of intrusion γ. The granular media were fluidized
(and then compacted when a closely packed state was prepared) using an air-fluidized bed (26) before each intrusion
(γ ≥ 0) and extraction (γ ≤ 0). g is gravitational acceleration. (B) Vertical (blue curve) and horizontal (green curve)
stresses σz,x = fz,x /A versus |z| for representative intrusion
and extraction using (β, γ) = ±(π/6, π/4) (movie S1). Blue
and green dashed lines are linear fits with zero intercept over
intermediate depths at which the plate was fully submerged
and far from the bottom of the container. Horizontal arrows on top indicate the range of leg depths in Figs. 3 and
4. (C) Vertical and (D) horizontal stresses per unit depth
αz,x [slopes of dashed fit lines in (B)] versus β and γ. Plate
schematics with arrows denote representative orientations and
movement directions. Black curves indicate where αz,x = 0.
The shaded areas indicate where αz (or αx ) is not opposing
the plate’s vertical (or horizontal) velocity. Circles indicate
αz,x from data shown in (B). Arrows above and below the
color bars indicate directions of αz,x for positive and negative
values.

3
lar media. Therefore, we modeled the hydrostatic-like
stresses as
(
αz,x (β, γ)|z| if z < 0
σz,x (|z|, β, γ) =
(1)
0
if z > 0
where αz,x are vertical and horizontal stresses per unit
depth (slopes of dashed fit lines in Fig. 2B). We found
that in all media tested, αz,x depended sensitively on
both attack angle β and intrusion angle γ (Fig. 2, C and
D, fig. S4, and additional data table S5). αz (or αx )
was opposing the plate’s vertical (or horizontal) velocity
for most but, counterintuitively, not all β and γ (exceptions are indicated by the shaded regions). For almost all
attack angles β, αz,x had larger magnitudes (|αz,x |) for
intrusion angle γ ≥ 0 than for γ ≤ 0; i.e., it was harder
to push the plate into granular media than to extract it.
For all intrusion angles γ except γ = ±π/2, |αz,x | were
asymmetric to attack angles β = 0 and β = ±π/2; i.e.,
only when the plate moved vertically were stress magnitudes the same for vertically or horizontally mirrored
orientations (e.g., β = ±π/6). These asymmetries are a
result of gravity breaking symmetry in the vertical plane
and differ from the case in the horizontal plane (26). Our
resistive force measurements are an advance from previous force models based on the flat-plate approximation
used in many terramechanical models (2, 25), which capture only the dependence of stresses on intruder depth,
but not on its orientation or movement direction (supplementary text section 1 and fig. S1). Despite their
different magnitudes and subtle differences in shape, the
overall profiles of stresses (per unit depth) αz,x (β, γ) were
similar for all media tested. Furthermore, these stress
profiles could be approximated (to the first order) by a
simple scaling of generic stress profiles (supplementary
text section 3, figs. S6 and S7, and tables S2 and S3).
We next tested our hypothesis that forces on a complex intruder moving in granular media in the vertical
plane could be approximated by the linear superposition
of forces on all intruder elements. We measured the net
lift Fz and thrust Fx on thin rigid model legs rotating
about a fixed axle [simulating a tethered body (7, 11)]
through granular media in the vertical plane at ∼1 cm/s
(Fig. 3 and movie S2) (28). We then compared them to
predictions from the resistive force model by the integration of stresses over the legs (movie S3)
Z
Z
Fz,x = σz,x (|z|s , βs , γs ) dAs = αz,x (βs , γs )|z|s dAs
S

S

(2)
where S is the leading surface of the leg; dAs , |z|s , βs ,
and γs are the area, depth below the surface, angle of attack, and angle of intrusion of infinitesimal leg elements;
and αz,x (βs , γs ) are element stresses per unit depth (interpolated from data in Fig. 2, C and D). To test the
robustness of our force model, we used three model legs

of different geometries [with the same maximal leg length
2R (28)]: a RHex robot’s c-leg (21, 22), a flat leg, and
a reversed c-leg (Fig. 3, A to C). In model calculations,
each leg was divided into 30 elements.
In all media tested (Fig. 3,D to F, and fig. S5), we
observed that for all three legs, the measured net lift and
thrust Fz,x as a function of leg angle θ (solid curves) were
asymmetric to the vertical downward direction (θ = 0),
and were larger during intrusion (θ ≤ 0) than during extraction (θ ≥ 0). Peak Fz,x were largest on the c-leg and
smallest on the reversed c-leg. The reversed c-leg experienced significant negative lift (suction force, Fz < 0) during extraction. For all media tested, our resistive force
model predicted Fz,x versus θ for all three legs (dashed
curves), capturing both the magnitudes and asymmetric
profiles. The relative errors of peak forces between data
and model predictions were within 10% for the c-leg in
four media tested, and within 33% for all three legs in all
media tested. The accuracy of our resistive force model
was significantly better than that of previous force models in which stresses depended only on depth (Fig. 3, D

FIG. 3. The resistive force model predicts forces on intruders of complex morphology and kinematics moving in granular
media (28). Three thin rigid model legs of different geometries, (A) a c-leg, (B) a flat leg, and (C) a reversed c-leg,
were rotated about a fixed axle at a hip height h through
granular media (gray area) in the vertical plane at an angular
velocity ω, generating leg speeds of v ∼ 1 cm/s, and net lift
Fz (blue) and thrust Fx (green) were measured as a function
of leg angle θ (movie S2). All three legs had identical maximal length 2R from the axle. g is gravitational acceleration.
(D to F) Fz,x versus θ on the three legs measured in the experiment (solid curves) and predicted by the resistive force
model (dashed curves) using Eq. 2 (movie S3). Insets: Fz,x
versus θ from experiment (solid curves) versus predicted (dotted curves) using Eq. 2 and previous force models in which
stresses depended only on depth (supplementary text section
1 and fig. S2).

4
to F, insets; supplementary text section 1 and fig. S2).
Furthermore, our resistive force model revealed that the
c-leg generated the largest forces, because its morphology allowed leg elements to not only reach deeper depths
but also access larger stress regions in Fig. 2, C and D
(particularly for elements at large depths).
Our discovery of the insensitivity of the stress profiles to particle properties (fig. S4) has practical benefits: For granular media of near-monodispersed, nearspherical, rounded particles, as an alternative to measuring αz,x for all attack angles β and intrusion angles γ in
the laboratory, one can simply perform a single measurement [of αz (0, π/2), using a horizontal plate penetrating
vertically downward] to infer all αz,x (β, γ) by a scaling
routine (supplementary text section 3 and fig. S9) and
predict forces (with a small loss in accuracy for the cleg and the flat leg, but a larger loss in accuracy for the
reversed c-leg, fig. S8).
We tested the ability of our resistive force model to
predict legged locomotion. We chose to study the locomotor performance (speed) of a small RHex-like robot
(22) (Fig. 4A, top, and movie S4) moving on granular
media (28). The robot’s six legs rotated nearly entirely in
the vertical plane during locomotion, and its small size
ensured that leg intrusion speeds were low enough for
particle inertia to be negligible. We chose poppy seeds as
the test granular medium, because the grains were both
small enough be prepared in our fluidized bed track (21)
and large enough to not jam the robot’s motor and gear
trains. The robot’s legs had a similar friction coefficient
with poppy seeds to that of the model legs and were sufficiently rigid so that they experienced negligible bending
during movement (28).
Unlike the sand-swimming lizard, which moves within
granular media quasistatically (thrust and drag are always roughly balanced) (26), legged locomotion on the
surface of granular media is dynamic (forces are not always instantaneously balanced). As a result, the resistive
force theory (which solves for speed by balancing forces)
(6, 26) cannot be directly applied. Thus, to use our resistive force model to calculate robot speed, we developed a
three-dimensional multibody dynamic simulation of the
robot (Fig. 4A, bottom) (28). The simulated robot had
the same body and leg morphology and used the same
alternating tripod gait as the actual robot and had its
motion constrained in the vertical plane. We divided
each body plate and leg into 30 elements. The velocity
~v and angular velocity ω
~ of the simulated robot’s body
were calculated by
(
~
F
dt
~v (t + dt) = ~v (t) + m
~

ω
~ (t + dt) = ω
~ (t) + NI dt

(3)

~ are the sum of net forces and torques
where F~ and N
on all the six legs and the body exerted by the granular

medium, calculated from our resistive force model by the
integration of stresses over each leg and the body using
Eq. 2; m and I are the robot’s mass and moment of
inertia; and t and dt are time and time step. To test the
robustness of our resistive force model and simulation,
we used legs of seven geometries with different curvatures
1/r (given maximal leg length 2R0 ) (Fig. 4C, inset) and
varied stride frequency f to up to 5 Hz (28).
We observed similar robot kinematics (Fig. 4A) and
forward speed vx versus time t (Fig. 4B) in both the
experiment (movie S5) and simulation (movie S6). The
robot moved faster and penetrated its legs less deeply
during stance using c-legs (Fig. 4A, left; Fig. 4B, red)
than using reversed c-legs (Fig. 4A, right; Fig. 4B, blue).
Average forward speed v x increased with stride frequency
f for legs of all curvatures 1/r and was lower at any f using legs of negative curvatures than using legs of positive
curvatures (Fig. 4, C and D). The agreement between
experiment and simulation in v x (f, 1/r) was remarkable:

FIG. 4. A multibody dynamic simulation using the resistive force model predicts legged locomotion on granular media (28). (A) Side views of a small RHex-like robot (movie
S4) at mid-stance during locomotion on granular media, using c-legs (left) and reversed c-legs (right) in the experiment
(top, movie S5) and simulation (bottom,movie S6). Arrows in
the simulation indicate element forces on one tripod of legs.
g is gravitational acceleration. (B) Forward speed vx versus
time t from two representative runs using c-legs (red, stride
frequency f = 2.0 Hz, curvature 1/r = 1/R0 ) and reversed
c-legs (blue, f = 2.2 Hz, 1/r = −1/R0 ). (C) Average forward
speed v x versus f using legs of seven curvatures 1/r transitioning from reversed c-legs to c-legs (inset), where r is the
radius of curvature, 2R0 is the maximal length of the robot
legs, and the minus sign denotes reversed legs. (D) v x versus
1/r at f = 1, 2, 3, and 4 Hz. In (B) to (D), solid and dashed
curves indicate the experiment and simulation, respectively.
Error bars in (C) denote ±1 SD ( 1 cm/s in the simulation).
Experimental data in (D) are interpolated from those in (C)
(hence no error bars). Red and blue arrows in (C) and (D)
indicate averages from data shown in (B).

5
Errors were within 20% for 90% of the f and 1/r tested
and within 35% for all the f and 1/r tested. Simulation
using our scaling routine also achieved reasonable accuracy (supplementary text section 5 and fig. S13). This
was an improvement over simulation using previous force
models in which stresses depended only on depth (fig.
S13). Our resistive force model and simulation revealed
that the robot moved faster using c-legs than using reversed c-legs, because whereas the c-legs penetrated less
deeply, their elements accessed larger stress regions in
Fig. 2, C and D, resulting in larger leg lift (fig. S14)
and smaller body drag. Our model and simulation also
allowed the prediction of ground reaction forces on granular media(Fig. 4A, red arrows, and fig. S13), which
would be difficult to measure otherwise. Furthermore,
our model and simulation predicted that using arc-like
legs (given maximal leg length 2R0 ) of an optimal curvature of 1/r = 0.86/R0 , the robot would achieve maximal
speed of v x = 72 cm/s (≈ 5 body length/s) at 5 Hz.
Our approach affords significant reduction in the computational time needed to model movement on granular
media. For example, relative to our multiparticle discrete element method (DEM) simulation of movement
on granular media (23, 27), our simulation using the resistive force model can achieve a factor of 106 in speed-up
(e.g., 10 s versus 30 days using DEM to simulate 1 s of
locomotion on a granular bed of 5 × 106 poppy seeds).
We close with a brief discussion of the limitations of
our model.We tested the predictive power of our scaling
routine (supplementary text section 3 and fig. S9) for
two highly polydispersed, nonspherical, highly angular
natural sands (supplementary text section 4, figs. S10
to S12, and table S4). We found that the model accuracy for natural sands was slightly worse than found in
the glass spheres and poppy seeds (for example, 35% versus 20% error in peak Fz for a rotating c-leg). As was
the case for the near-spherical granular media tested, the
functional forms of forces on the c-leg and the flat leg
were still well captured by our scaling routine. Furthermore, the overestimation was not affected by reducing
the polydispersity of the natural sand. This suggests that
the nonsphericity and angularity of natural sand particles
(30) may be the cause of this overestimation, which may
require additional model fitting parameters and scaling
factors. Our model is intended for dry sand [∼0.1 to ∼1
mm in particle diameter (29)] and may not work for dry
cohesive powder (≤∼0.01 mm) (31). We do not expect
our model to work if the particle size approaches a characteristic length of the locomotor (for example, ∼1-cm
particles for our robot of ∼1-cm foot size), so that the
continuum assumption breaks down and particles effectively become boulders. We also do not expect our model
to capture wet, cohesive flowable media such as soil and
mud.
We have developed a new approach to predicting
legged locomotion on granular media. This terradynam-

ics relies on new resistive force measurements and linear superposition (6, 26, 27). The general profiles of
these resistive force measurements are insensitive (other
than magnitudes) to a variety of granular media composed of slightly polydispersed, approximately spherical,
rounded particles. Our terradynamics may not be limited
to legged locomotion, because the integration of stresses
should in principle work for devices of other morphology
and kinematics, such as wheels, tracks, and earth movers
moving on granular media (2, 25). For the particle types
tested here, an important addition to our model would be
to capture three-dimensional effects (16) and spatial and
temporal variation in compaction (21) and slopes (17),
and test its validity in the high speed “inertial fluid”
regime (when leg intrusion speed is ≥ 1 m/s, at which
particle inertia dominates forces) (23). Our resistive force
model also provides opportunities to test and develop
new physics theories of dense granular flow (32). Finally,
we envision that, in concert with aero- and hydrodynamics (3–12), a general terradynamics of complex ground
will not only advance understanding of how animals move
(1) at present (5–10, 13–19, 26) and in the past (17, 33),
but also facilitate the development of robots with locomotor capabilities approaching those of organisms (11,
12, 20–23).

[1] M. H. Dickinson, C. T. Farley, R. J. Full, M. A. R. Koehl,
R. Kram, S. Lehman, How animals move: An integrative
view. Science 288, 100 (2000).
[2] M. G. Bekker, Off-the-Road Locomotion, Research and
Development in Terramechanics (Univ. of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor, MI, 1960).
[3] B. Etkin, Dynamics of Atmospheric Flight (Wiley, New
York, 1972).
[4] J. N. Newman, Marine Hydrodynamics (MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1977).
[5] S. Vogel, Life in Moving Fluids: The Physical Biology of
Flow (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1996).
[6] E. Lauga, T. R. Powers, The hydrodynamics of swimming microorganisms. Rep. Prog. Phys. 72, 096601
(2009).
[7] Z. J. Wang, Dissecting insect flight. Annu. Rev. Fluid
Mech. 37, 183 (2005).
[8] C. J. Pennycuick, Mechanics of flight. Avian Biol. 5, 1
(1975).
[9] G. V. Lauder, J. C. Nauen, E. G. Drucker, Experimental
hydrodynamics and evolution: Function of median fins
in ray-finned fishes. Integr. Comp. Biol. 42, 1009 (2002).
[10] R. Dudley, The Biomechanics of Insect Flight: Form,
Function, Evolution (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
NJ, 2002).
[11] R. S. Fearing, K. H. Chiang, M. H. Dickinson, D. L. Pick,
M. Sitti, J. Yan, Wing transmission for a micromechanical flying insect. IEEE Int. Conf. Rob. Auto. 2000, 1509
(2000).
[12] G. V. Lauder, E. J. Anderson, J. Tangorra, P. G. A. Madden, Fish biorobotics: Kinematics and hydrodynamics of

6
self-propulsion. J. Exp. Biol. 210, 2767 (2007).
[13] R. Blickhan, The spring-mass model for running and hopping. J. Biomech. 22, 1217 (1989).
[14] G. A. Cavagna, H. Thys, A. Zamboni, The sources of
external work in level walking and running. J. Physiol.
262, 639 (1976).
[15] P. Holmes, R. J. Full, D. E. Koditschek, J. Guckenheimer,
The dynamics of legged locomotion: Models, analyses,
and challenges. SIAM Rev. 48, 207 (2006).
[16] C. Li, S. T. Hsieh, D. I. Goldman, Multi-functional foot
use during running in the zebratailed lizard (Callisaurus
draconoides). J. Exp. Biol. 215, 3293 (2012).
[17] L. R. Brand, Variations in salamander trackways resulting from substrate differences. J. Paleontol. 70, 1004
(1996).
[18] S. G. Fancy, R. G. White, Energy expenditures by caribou while cratering in snow. J. Wildl. Manage. 49, 987
(1985).
[19] L. J. Vitt, S. S. Sartorius, T. C. S. Avila-Pires, M. C.
Espósito, Life on the leaf litter: The ecology of Anolis
nitens tandai in the Brazilian Amazon. Copeia 2001, 401
(2001).
[20] M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, R. Playter, and
the BigDog Team, BigDog, the rough-terrain quadruped
robot. Inter. Fed. Auto. Cont. 2008, 10822 (2008).
[21] C. Li, P. B. Umbanhowar, H. Komsuoglu, D. E.
Koditschek, D. I. Goldman, Sensitive dependence of the
motion of a legged robot on granular media. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 3029 (2009).
[22] A. M. Johnson, M. T. Hale, G. C. Haynes, D. E.
Koditschek, Autonomous legged hill and stairwell ascent.
2011 IEEE Saf. Sec. Res. Rob. 2011, 134 (2011).
[23] T. Zhang, F. Qian, C. Li, P. Masarati, A. M.
Hoover, P. Birkmeyer, A. Pullin, R. Fearing, D. I.
Goldman, Ground fluidization promotes rapid running of a lightweight robot. Int. J. Robotics. Res. 32,
10.1177/0278364913481690 (2013).
[24] R. M. Nedderman, Statics and Kinematics of Granular
Materials (Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, 1992).
[25] G. Meirion-Griffith, M. Spenko, An empirical study of
the terramechanics of small unmanned ground vehicles.
IEEE Aerospace Conf. 2010, 1 (2010).
[26] R. D. Maladen, Y. Ding, C. Li, D. I. Goldman, Undulatory swimming in sand: Subsurface locomotion of the
sandfish lizard. Science 325, 314 (2009).
[27] Y. Ding, N. Gravish, D. I. Goldman, Drag induced lift in
granular media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 028001 (2011).
[28] Materials and methods are available as supplementary
materials on Science Online.
[29] R. A. Bagnold, The Physics of Blown Sand and Desert
Dunes (Dover Publications, Mineola, NY, 2005).
[30] G. Cho, J. Dodds, J. C. Santamarina, Particle shape effects on packing density, stiffness, and strength: natural
and crushed sands. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng. 132,
591 (2006).
[31] B. Chaudhuri, A. Mehrotra, F. J. Muzzio, M. S. Tomassone, Cohesive effects in powder mixing in a tumbling
blender. Powder Technol. 165, 105 (2006).
[32] K. Kamrin, G. Koval, Nonlocal constitutive relation
for steady granular flow. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 178301
(2012).
[33] J. A. Clack, Gaining Ground: The Origin and Evolution of Tetrapods (Indiana Univ. Press, Bloomington, IN,
2012).

[34] G. L. Ghiringhelli, P. Masarati, P. Mantegazza, M. W.
Nixon, Multi-body analysis of a tiltrotor conguration.
Nonlin. Dyn. 19, 333 (1999).
[35] G. Hill, S. Yeung, S. A. Koehler, Scaling vertical drag
forces in granular media. Europhys. Lett. 72, 137 (2005).
[36] R. Albert, M. A. Pfeifer, A.-L. Barabási, P. Schiffer, Slow
drag in a granular medium. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 205
(1999).
[37] N. Mazouchova, N. Gravish, A. Savu, D. I. Goldman, Utilization of granular solidification during terrestrial locomotion of hatchling sea turtles. Biol. Lett. 6, 398 (2010).
[38] N. Gravish, P. B. Umbanhowar, D. I. Goldman, Force
and flow transition in plowed granular media. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 105, 208301 (2010).

Acknowledgements
We thank Y. Ding, P. Umbanhowar, N. Gravish,
G. Meirion-Griffith, S. Sharpe, H. Komsuoglu, D.
Koditschek, and R. Full for discussions; J. Shen for assistance with robot modification; P. Masarati for multibody dynamic simulator support; S. Sharpe for measuring the angle of repose of 3-mm glass spheres and assistance with photography; P. Umbanhowar and H. Marvi
for natural sand collection; and all the members of the
Complex Rheology And Biomechanics Lab at Georgia
Tech for general assistance. This work was supported
by the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, the Army Research
Laboratory Micro Autonomous Systems and Technology
Collaborative Technology Alliance, the Army Research
Office, and the NSF Physics of Living Systems program.
C.L. was partially supported by a Miller Research Fellowship from the Miller Institute for Basic Research in
Science of the University of California, Berkeley. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. C.L.
designed the study, performed resistive force measurements, and performed robot experiments; C.L. and T.Z.
performed model calculations; T.Z. performed robot simulation; D.I.G. oversaw the study; and C.L. and D.I.G.
wrote the paper.
Citation Information
Chen Li, Tingnan Zhang, Daniel I. Goldman, A Terradynamics of Legged Locomotion on Granular Media, Science 339, 1408–1411 (2013), DOI: 10.1126/science.1229163

7
Materials and Methods
Force measurements
We used aluminum to construct the plate element (area
A = 3.81 × 2.54 cm2 , thickness = 0.64 cm) and model
legs (maximal length 2R = 7.62 cm, width = 2.54 cm,
thickness = 0.64 cm). We measured the friction coefficient µ between aluminum and poppy seeds to be 0.40
(later we constructed robot legs using plastic of a similar
friction coefficient with poppy seeds, 0.36), by placing an
aluminum plate on a wooden plate bonded with a single
layer of poppy seeds, increasing the slope of the wooden
plate from zero, and examining the angle ξ at which the
aluminum plate began to slide. Thus µ = tanξ. The
length and width of both the plate element and model
legs were ∼ 10 times the particle diameter, ensuring that
the granular media could be approximated as a continuum.
Before each force measurement, we used an air fluidized bed (24 × 22 cm2 surface area) (26) to prepare
the granular media (15 cm deep) to a well-defined compaction (see table S1 for the volume fractions of closely
and loosely packed states of the granular media tested).
Air flow was turned off during force measurements. We
used a 6 degree-of-freedom robotic arm (CRS Robotics)
to move the plate element and rotate the model legs.
We used a 6-axis force and torque transducer (ATI Industrial Automation) mounted between the intruder and
the robotic arm to measure forces to a precision of 0.05 N
at a sampling frequency of 100 Hz. We performed all the
force measurements at low speeds (∼ 1 cm/s) to ensure
that particle inertia was negligible, and in a vertical plane
at the middle of the air fluidized bed and far from the
sidewalls (distance > 3 cm) to minimize boundary effects.
In the plate element intrusion experiment, we attached
the plate to the force and torque transducer via a supporting rod and an adjustable mount with which attack
angle β could be varied. We varied intrusion angle γ by
adjusting the trajectory of the robotic arm. For each
combination of β and γ, we separately measured the
forces on the supporting rod and mount moving in the
granular media without the plate, and subtracted them
to obtain forces exerted by the granular media on the
plate alone.
During each test session, we first prepared the granular
media while the plate was above the surface. We then
moved the plate (oriented at attack angle β) downward to
the surface (depth |z| = 0), paused it for 2 seconds, and
then intruded it into the granular media along intrusion
angle γ. After intrusion was finished, we prepared the
granular media again, and extracted the plate along the
same path. This gave us measurements of stresses σz,x
for both ±(β, γ). For horizontal movements (γ = 0),
σz,x were nearly constant when the plate was far from
the container sidewalls, and we obtained αz,x by fitting

Eq. 1 to averages of σz,x in the steady state regions at
three depths (|z| = 2.54 cm, 5.08 cm, and 7.62 cm). We
measured αz,x for γ within [−π/2, π/2], and determined
αz,x for γ within [−π, −π/2] and [π/2, π] by symmetry:
(
αz (β, γ) = αz (−β, −π − γ) if −π ≤ γ ≤ −π/2
(S1)
αz (β, γ) = αz (−β, π − γ)
if π/2 ≤ γ ≤ π
(
αx (β, γ) = −αx (−β, −π − γ)
αx (β, γ) = −αx (−β, π − γ)

if −π ≤ γ ≤ −π/2
if π/2 ≤ γ ≤ π
(S2)
In the model leg rotation experiment, we rotated the
model legs at an angular velocity ω = 0.2 rad/s at a hip
height h = 2 cm within leg angle −3π/4 ≤ θ ≤ 3π/4
(at the beginning and end of which all three legs tested
were fully above the granular surface), where leg angle θ
was defined as the angle sweeping from the vertical downward direction to the direction along which leg length was
maximal. For each model leg, we separately measured
the forces due to the weight of the model legs rotating
in the air, and subtracted them to obtain the forces on
the model legs exerted by the granular media during rotation.
Due to the high repeatability of our fluidized bed
and robotic arm, we found that for all media tested,
run-to-run variation in αz,x for fixed β and γ was always
within 0.005 N/cm3 at any given depth; thus we only
performed one trial for each combination of β and γ.
All the stresses were calculated in the regions where the
plate was far from the container boundaries (distance
> 6 cm). We also confirmed that for low enough speeds,
intrusion forces in granular media were insensitive to
speed (for example, in loosely packed poppy seeds, at
v = 1 m/s, force only increased by less than 20% from
that at v = 1 cm/s); thus, particle inertia was negligible.
Robot experiments
We built our robot (body length = 13 cm, body mass
= 150 g) by modifying a small commercially available
robot (RoboXplorer, Smart Lab). The robot had similar morphology and kinematics as a RHex robot, with a
rigid body and six legs performing 1 degree-of-freedom
rotation in an alternating tripod gait. We substituted
the stock motor with a stronger one (RadioShack Super
Speed 9–18 VDC Hobby Motor, Model # 273-256) and
modified the gear trains (gear ratio: 47 revolutions in
the motor transmits into 1 rotation of the legs). These
changes increased maximal stride frequency f to 5 Hz.
We removed the external body shell to reduce weight
and the belly area (to 13 × 2 cm2 ). This reduced drag on
the belly during locomotion on granular media.
We used 3-D printing to make custom robot legs. All
the legs had the same maximal length 2R0 = 4.1 cm,

8
width = 1.0 cm, and thickness = 0.3 cm, but different
curvatures 1/r = [−1, −0.92, −0.60, 0, 0.60, 0.92, 1]/R0 .
The ABS plastic used to fabricate the legs had a similar friction coefficient with poppy seeds (0.36) to that of
aluminum with poppy seeds (0.40). The leg width and
length were ∼ 10 times the particle diameter, allowing
the granular media to be approximated as a continuum.
We ensured that the legs had large enough stiffness and
moved like rigid bodies (< 5% deformation) during locomotion.
We tuned the center of mass of the robot to overlap
with the geometric center of the body by adding mass to
the lighter end of the robot. We measured the masses,
dimensions, and relative positions of all robot body and
leg parts, and calculated the moment of inertia of the
robot to be I = 2.08 × 103 g cm2 about the pitch axis
through the center of mass. We powered the robot by
an external power supply (Power Ten Inc.) to ensure
constant voltage during trials, and adjusted voltage to
vary stride frequency f between trials.
Before each trial, we used an air fluidized bed track
(200 × 50 cm2 surface area) to prepare the granular
media (12 cm deep) to a well-defined compaction, using
methods similar to those in (21). We used two synchronized high-speed cameras (X-PRI, AOS Technologies)
to capture top and side views of the robot’s locomotion
at 500 frame/s. We measured f from the side view,
and measured forward speed vx from the top view by
digitizing a high contrast marker placed near the center
of mass. For each f and 1/r, we performed three trials
and reported mean ± s.d. for average forward speed v x
in experiment.
Robot simulation
We used a multibody dynamic simulator, MBDyn (34),
to create a simulation of the robot locomotion on granular media. MBDyn features a full three-dimensional simulation with 6 degrees of freedom (3 translations and 3
rotations). We constructed the robot body using 3 rigid
plates (the front, rear, and belly surfaces) and 6 rigid
legs. We constrained the robot body movement within
the vertical plane, with fore-aft and dorso-ventral translations and pitch, and allowed the legs to only rotate about
their axles perpendicular to the vertical plane. For each
time step, we calculated the depth |z|s , attack angle βs ,
and intrusion angle γs for each element to determine element stresses σz,x (using Eq. 1 and αz,x interpolated
from the data in Fig. 2, C and D). We then summed
forces on all elements to obtain net forces Fz,x using our
resistive force model by Eq. 2, and calculated the body
dynamics by Eq. 3. We found that dividing each body
plate and leg into fewer elements could further increase
simulation speed at the cost of model accuracy.
In simulation tests, we varied curvature 1/r between
−1/R0 ≤ 1/r ≤ 1/R0 in increments of 0.04/R0 , and varied

stride frequency f between 0 ≤ f ≤ 5 Hz in increments
of 0.2 Hz. For each f and 1/r, we performed three trials
using different initial conditions with a phase difference
of 2π/3 for each tripod. We found that this resulted in
variation in average forward speed v x of  1 cm/s; thus,
we reported only the means of v x in simulation. We confirmed that at the maximal stride frequency tested (5 Hz)
the leg speeds were < 1 m/s averaged over a stance, allowing particle inertia to be negligible.

9
Supplementary Text
This supplementary text contains 5 sections:
In section 1, we review the depth-only vertical penetration and horizontal drag force models. Based on the
flat-plate approximation, we then calculate stresses per
unit depth and net forces on rotating legs using these
depth-only force models, and compare with our resistive
force measurements and model predictions.
In section 2, we present our resistive force measurements and model calculations for a variety of granular
media tested, which have different particle size, density,
friction, and compaction; from these results we discover
that the stress profiles are generic.
In section 3, we develop a scaling routine to capture
the similar stress profiles observed for the variety of granular media, by scaling generic stress profiles determined
from averages of fits to the measured stress profiles. This
provides a practical means to easily apply our resistive
force model.
In section 4, we test the ability of our scaling routine
to predict forces on intruders moving in natural sands,
and discuss limitations of our model for natural sands.
In section 5, we compare the predictive accuracy for
locomotor performance (speed) of the robot using our
resistive force model to that using our scaling routine
and that using the depth-only force models.

|z|

FIG. S1.
Effective vertical (αz (β, γ), left) and horizon|z|
tal (αz,x (β, γ), right) stresses per unit depth as a function
of attack angle β and intrusion angle γ for loosely packed
poppy seeds, calculated from eq. S7 using αz (0, sgn(ż)π/2)
and αx (π/2, 0) measured in experiment (Fig. 2, C and D).
See Fig. 2, A and B for schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.

1. Depth-only force models and their limitations
Previous studies of intrusion forces in granular media focused on simple intruders (e.g. plates, rods, and
spheres) moving with simple kinematics (e.g. vertical
penetration and horizontal drag). For example, the vertical force fz on a horizontal plate element (β = 0) moving
vertically (γ = ±π/2) in granular media was observed to
be proportional to the plate’s depth |z| and area A (21,
35):
fz = αz (0, sgn(ż)π/2)|z|A

(S3)

Similarly, the horizontal force fx on a vertical plate element (β = ±π/2) moving horizontally (γ = 0) in granular media was proportional to plate depth |z| and plate
area A (36–38):
fx = αx (π/2, 0)|z|A

(S4)

where ż is the velocity of the plate in the vertical direction, and αz (0, sgn(ż)π/2) and αx (π/2, 0) are vertical and horizontal stresses per unit depth for (β, γ) =
(0, ±π/2) and (π/2, 0) (determined from measurements
in Fig. 2, C and D).
Both the vertical penetration and horizontal drag force
models only account for the dependence of stresses on
the intruder’s depth (|z|), but not the dependence on
its orientation (attack angle β) or movement direction

FIG. S2. Net lift Fz (blue) and thrust Fx (green) versus leg
angle θ on the three model legs for all media tested. Solid
curves: experimental measurements. Dotted curves: predictions from the depth-only force models. See Fig. 3 A to C for
schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.

(intrusion angle γ). Hereafter we refer to these force
models as the “depth-only force models”.
In previous studies of legged locomotion on granular
media (16, 21, 37), due to the lack of the resistive force
model, the forces on a complex intruder were estimated

10
from the depth-only force models, using the flat-plate
approximation: The vertical force on a leg element of area
dAs and arbitrary β and γ was approximated by that on
a horizontal leg element whose area was the element area
projected into the horizontal plane (16, 21):
dAzs = |cosβ|dAs

(S5)

Similarly, the horizontal force on the leg element was approximated by that on a vertical leg element whose area
was the element area projected into the vertical plane
(37):
dAzs = |sinβ|dAs

model legs rotated through all media tested, by the inte|z|
gration of stresses over the legs (Eq. 3) using αz,x (β, γ).
We found that they not only significantly overpredicted
peak Fz (by up to 1400%) but also erroneously predicted
similar peak Fz,x for the c-leg and reversed c-leg (fig. S2).
2. Generality of resistive force model for a variety of
granular media
To test the generality of our resistive force model and
provide a database for future studies (we provide the
force measurements in this section in Additional Data

(S6)

The effective stresses per unit depth calculated from
these depth-only force models using flat plate approximation were then:
(
|z|
αz (β, γ) = αz (0, sgn(ż)π/2)|cosβ|
(S7)
|z|
αx (β, γ) = αx (π/2, 0)|sinβ|
|z|

Comparing the αz,x (β, γ) calculated using eq. S7
(fig. S1) to our resistive force measurements αz,x (β, γ)
(Fig. 2, C and D) for loosely packed poppy seeds, we
found that these depth-only force models did not capture most of the measured stress profiles. In particular,
the depth-only vertical penetration force model overpredicted αz (β, γ) for all β and γ except when the plate was
horizontal (β = 0) and moving vertically (γ = ±π/2).
|z|
Contrary to experimental measurements, the αz,x calculated from the depth-only models were symmetric to
|z|
|z|
β = 0 (horizontal orientation), and αz (or αx ) was always opposing the plate’s vertical (or horizontal) velocity
(the shaded regions shrank to a line).
We used these depth-only force models to calculate the
net lift Fz and thrust Fx versus leg angle θ for the three

|z|

FIG. S3. The three granular media tested in our study. Top:
regular images. Bottom: microscope images. The length of
each scale bar is 1 mm. Photo credit of (A) and (C): Sarah
Sharpe.

|z|

FIG. S4. Vertical (αz (β, γ), left) and horizontal (αz,x (β, γ),
right) stresses per unit depth as a function of attack angle β
and intrusion angle γ for all media tested. (A) and (B) are
reproduced from Fig. 2, C and D. See Fig. 2, A and B for
schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.

11
model
To provide a means for practical use of our resistive
force model and comparison with new theories of dense
granular flow (32), we performed a fitting approximation
to the stress per unit depth data αz,x for all media tested,
and developed a scaling routine based on the data fits.
We first performed a discrete Fourier transform of the
αz,x (β, γ) data (fig. S4) over −π/2 ≤ β ≤ π/2 and −π ≤
γ ≤ π to obtain a fitting function. We examined the
Fourier coefficients and found that the αz,x (β, γ) data
of all media tested could be well approximated by the
following fits:

1
1
X
X

nγ
mβ

 αfit (β, γ) =

+
)
[Am,n cos2π(
z


π
2π


m=−1 n=0



nγ
mβ



+
)]
+Bm,n sin2π(
π
2π
(S8)
1
1

X
X

nγ
mβ

fit
 αx (β, γ) =
[Cm,n cos2π(
+
)


π
2π


m=−1 n=0




nγ
mβ


+
)]
+Dm,n sin2π(
π
2π

FIG. S5. Net lift Fz (blue) and thrust Fx (green) versus leg
angle θ on the three model legs for all media tested. Solid
curves: experimental measurements. Dashed curves: resistive force model predictions. (A) to (C) are reproduced from
Fig. 3, D to F. See Fig. 3 A to C for schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.

Table S5), we performed resistive force measurements
for three granular media—poppy seeds, 0.3 mm glass
spheres, and 3 m glass spheres (fig. S3), which have
different particle size, shape, density, and friction (measured by angle of repose) (table S1). We prepared these
granular media into well-defined compactions which affected stresses (21, 38). We prepared poppy seeds and
0.3 mm glass spheres into both a loosely packed (LP)
and a closely packed (CP) states, and prepared 3 m glass
spheres into a closely packed (CP) state (table S1).
Despite differences in magnitudes and fine features, we
observed similar profiles of the vertical and horizontal
stresses per unit depth αz,x (β, γ) for all media tested
(fig. S4). We provide the αz,x (β, γ) data for all media
in Additional Data Table S5 (separate file in Microsoft
Excel format).
For all media tested, our resistive force model predicted the net lift Fz and thrust Fx versus leg angle θ
on the three model legs rotated through granular media
(fig. S5). Compared with predictions from the depthonly force models (fig. S1), our resistive force model had
a significant improvement in accuracy.
3. Scaling routine for easy use of the resistive force

using nine zeroth- and first-order terms (whose magnitudes are larger than 0.05A0,0 ) (table S2):
M = A0,0 A1,0 B1,1 B0,1 B−1,1 C1,1 C0,1 C−1,1 D1,0
(S9)
By symmetry, αz (β ≤ 0, π/2) = αz (β ≥ 0, π/2), and
αx (β ≤ 0, π/2) = −αx (β ≥ 0, π/2). However, the data
slightly deviated from this equality because the initial
positions of the plate were close to one of the boundaries
of the container. Therefore, before the Fourier transform,
we averaged the raw data for γ = ±π/2 to restore symmetry by αz (β ≤ 0, π/2) = αz (β ≥ 0, π/2) = 12 [αz (β ≤
0, π/2) + αz (β ≥ 0, π/2)]. The raw data were also not
uniformly sampled in the γ direction; we found that this
only resulted in small errors in data fitting.

FIG. S6. Scaled Fourier coefficients Mi /ζi of all media tested
(thin colored curves) can be approximated by a generic coefficient curve M0 (thick black curve).

T

12
Fz,x scaled by the scaling factors ζ:
generic
Fz,x
(θ) ≈ Fz,x (θ)/ζ

FIG. S7.
Generic stress (per unit depth) profiles
generic
αz,x
(β, γ) for all media tested. See Fig. 2, A and B for
schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.

However, the agreement was worse for the reversed c-leg.
Our resistive force model revealed that this was because
generic
by using Fz,x
(θ), stresses were significantly overestimated for the reversed c-leg’s elements that reached large
depths.
We further observed that the ratio of the maximal vertical stress (which occurred on a horizontal plate moving downward) between the measurements (αz (0, π/2))
and fits (αzfit (0, π/2)) was similar for all media tested (table S3):
χ = αz (0, π/2)/αzfit (0, π/2) = 1.26 ± 0.14

We found that for all media tested (denoted by i =
poppyLP, poppyCP, 0.3mmLP, 0.3mmCP, and 3mmCP),
the Fourier coefficients Mi could be collapsed onto a
generic coefficient curve, M0 , by dividing Mi by a scaling
factor ζi (table S2, fig. S10):
Mi /ζi ≈ M0

(S10)

This enabled us to scale stresses per unit depth (αz,x )
and thus forces (fz,x and Fz,x ) for all media tested. By
eq. S8, using the generic coefficient curve M0 (ζ = 1) from
table S2, we calculated generic stress (per unit depth)
generic
(β, γ) (fig. S7). We found that, by multiprofiles αz,x
plication by the scaling factor ζ, these generic stress profiles well approximated the measured αz,x (β, γ) (fig. S4)
for all media tested:
generic
αz,x (β, γ) ≈ ζαz,x
(β, γ)

(S11)

generic
(β, γ), we calculated the
Using Eq. 2 and αz,x
generic
(θ) on the three model legs
generic force profiles Fz,x

rotated through granular media (fig. S8). We found that
in all media tested and for both the c-leg and the flat
leg, these generic force profiles captured the measured

FIG. S8.
The measured net forces scaled by the measured scaling factors Fz,x (θ)/ζ for all media tested (thin
curves), in comparison with the generic profiles of net forces
generic
Fz,x
(θ) (thick curves) calculated from the generic stress
generic
profiles αz,x
(fig. S7). See Fig. 3 A to C for schematic of
the experiment and definition of variables.

(S12)

(S13)

where χ is in mean ± s.d.
Therefore, we propose that for a sufficiently level
and uniform dry granular medium composed of nearmonodispersed, near-spherical, rounded particles of ∼
0.1 to ∼ 1 mm in diameter, one can simply measure its
maximal vertical stress αz (0, π/2) by pushing a horizontal plate downward to infer the maximal value of the fit
vertical stress αzfit (0, π/2):
αzfit (0, π/2) = αz (0, π/2)/χ ≈ 0.8αz (0, π/2)

(S14)

The value of αzfit (0, π/2) in N/m3 then gives the scaling
factor ζ for this granular medium, because we choose the
magnitudes of the generic curve M0 so that the values
of ζ and αzfit (0, π/2) are nearly the same for all media
tested:
fit
ζ ≈ αz,x
(β, γ)

(S15)

Note that this equation only equates the numeric values
on both sides, because ζ is dimensionless.
Then, from eq. S11, by scaling the generic stress progeneric
files αz,x
(fig. S7) by the determined scaling factor ζ,

FIG. S9. A scaling routine to easily apply our resistive force
model.

13
we can obtain an approximation of stress profiles for this
granular medium:
scaled
generic
αz,x (β, γ) ≈ αz,x
(β, γ) = ζαz,x
(β, γ)

(S16)

This scaling routine provides an alternative to measuring αz,x for all β and γ (at the cost of model accuracy).
As demonstrated by the model leg rotation experiments
(fig. S8) and robot locomotion experiments (see fig. S13
in the next section), our scaling routine only suffers a
small loss in accuracy for much of the leg morphology
and stride frequencies tested. This technique can be particulary useful in a field setting, because only a single
force measurement is needed.
We summarize these practical steps to use our resistive
force model in fig. S9.

FIG. S11. Maximal vertical stress σz (0, π/2) versus depth
|z| measured in the natural sands using a plate element
horizontally oriented and penetrating vertically downward
(β = 0, γ = π/2). Dashed lines are linear fits with zero intercept to the data in the linear regime at shallow depths. See
Fig. 2, A and B for schematic of the experiment and definition
of variables.

4. Applicability of resistive force model to natural sands
To test the predictive power of our resistive force model
for natural sands, we chose two natural sands of higher
polidispersity and angularity than those of the granular
media tested, and examined whether the scaling routine
(fig. S9) could predict the net forces Fz,x (θ) on the three
model legs during rotation through the natural sands.
The two natural sands, referred to as “Yuma sand” and
“29 Palms sand” (table S4, fig. S10), were collected from
the Mojave Desert in the southwest United States, one
from Yuma, Arizona and the other from 29 Palms, California. The Yuma sand had most particles (70% by mass)
in the 0.06–0.3 mm particle size range, and the 29 Palms
sand had most particles (91% by mass) in the 0.3–3 mm
particle size range. Both naturals sands were fluidized by
the fluidized bed before each force measurement was performed. We further tested modified 29 Palms sand with
reduced polydispersity to examine the effect of polydispersity on model accuracy.

FIG. S10.
The natural sands used to test the predictive
power of our scaling routine. Top: regular images. Bottom:
microscope images. The length of each scale bar is 1 mm.

During downward penetration (γ = π/2) into both the
Yuma and 29 Palms sands, the vertical stress σz on a
horizontal plate (β = 0) increased nearly proportionally to depth |z| at low enough depths (fig. S11, solid
curves), similar to observations in the granular media
tested. However, for both the natural sands, σz vesus |z|
displayed nonlinearity as depth further increased sooner
than observed for the granular media tested. This was
because both natural sands had larger internal stresses
(larger αz,x magnitudes) and likely suffered boundary effects at much shallower depths as compared to the granular media tested. In addition, for the Yuma sand which
had more particles in the 0.06–0.3 mm particle size range,
this nonlinearity due to boundary effects was more pronounced. Therefore, to minimize possible errors from
boundary effects, we perform linear fits with zero inter-

FIG. S12.
Net lift Fz (blue) and thrust Fx (green) versus leg angle θ on the three model legs for the natural sands
tested. Solid curves: experimental measurements. Dashed
curves: resistive force model predictions using the scaling routine (fig. S9). See Fig. 3 A to C for schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.

14
cept to the σz versus |z| data (fig. S11, dashed curves)
over the linear regime (0–2 cm for the Yuma sand; 0–
3 cm for the 29 Palms sand) to obtain αz (0, π/2) (slopes
of dashed lines) for both the natural sands. This gave
us their scaling factors ζ and estimates of their stress
scaled
generic
profiles from αz,x
(β, γ) = ζαz,x
(β, γ) (eq. S16).
For the three model legs rotated through both the
Yuma and 29 Palms sands, both the net lift Fz and
thrust Fx versus leg angle θ displayed asymmetric profiles
similar to those observed for the granular media tested
(fig. S12, solid curves). Using the αz (0, π/2) obtained
from the vertical penetration experiment (fig. S11), our
scaling routine significantly overpredicted Fz,x (θ) on the
c-leg for both the Yuma and 29 Palms sands (both by
35%). Nevertheless, the shape of model predictions were
similar to experimental observations (fig. S12, dashed
curves). The model accuracy was best for the flat leg,
and worst for the reversed c-leg.
There are two major differences between the natural
sands and the granular media tested: The natural sands
have higher polydispersity, and are also less spherical and
more angular. To probe where the overprediction (of
forces on the c-leg) stemmed from, we further tested the
29 Palms sand with reduced polydispersity (obtained by

FIG. S13. Average forward speed v x of the robot as a function of stride frequency f (left) and leg curvature 1/r (right)
on loosely packed poppy seeds. Solid curves: experimental
measurements. Dashed curves: simulation predictions. Top:
using the measured stresses (αz,x ). Middle: using the scaled
scaled
generic
generic stress profiles (αz,x
= ζαz,x
). Bottom: using
|z|
stresses from the depth-only force models (αz,x ). The drop
|z|
0
of v x vs. f at near R /r = 1 using αz,x was due to pitch instability of the robot in simulation (the robot became upside
down). (A) and (B) are reproduced from Fig. 4, C and D.
See Fig. 4 A and B for representative runs of the experiment
and definition of variables.

sieving the sand to obtain only the 0.6–0.7 mm particles).
We found that while both αz (0, π/2) and Fz,x (θ) dropped
by 14% (figs. S11 and S12), the model overprediction of
forces on the c-leg remained the same (35%). This suggested that the non-spherical and angular shape of the
natural sand particles, rather than their higher polydispersity, was likely the cause of the model overprediction.
5. Comparison of model accuracy in predicting legged
locomotion
To evaluate the accuracy of our scaling routine in predicting legged locomotion, we used our multibody dynamic simulation to simulate the robot’s movement on
loosely packed poppy seeds using the scaled generic stress
scaled
generic
profiles (αz,x
= ζαz,x
). We calculated the robot’s
average forward speed v x versus stride frequency f and
leg curvature 1/r (fig. S13), and compare it with experimental measurements and resistive force model predictions (without using the scaling routine). As a compar|z|
ison, we also calculated v x (f, 1/r) using αz,x obtained
from the depth-only force models (fig. S1).
We found that the simulation using scaled generic
generic
) only suffered a small loss in
stress profiles (ζαz,x
accuracy as compared to that using the measured αz,x .
|z|
By contrast, the simulation using stresses αz,x from the
depth-only force models suffered a larger loss in accuracy
(by up to 150% error), and in particular, erroneously predicted that the robot moved at similar speeds using both
c-legs and reversed c-legs.
In addition to the predictions locomotor kinematics,
our resistive force model and multibody dynamic simu-

FIG. S14. Vertical (Fz , top) and horizontal (Fx , bottom)
ground reaction forces versus time t on both tripods of the
robot during locomotion on loosely packed poppy seeds, calculated from the simulation using the resistive force model.
Solid and dashed curves correspond to forces on the two
tripods of legs, respectively. Results are for the two representative runs shown in Fig. 4B. Note that these ground reaction forces do not include those on the robot body (which
were also calculated but not plotted here).

15
lation also allowed us to calculate ground reaction forces
(fig. S14) during locomotion on granular media (which
would be otherwise difficult to measure), in a similar
fashion as calculations of lift, drag, thrust, traction, and
resistance in studies of vehicle mobility in fluids and terramechanics studies. Notice the larger vertical ground
reaction forces produced by the C-legs relative to those
by the reversed c-legs. This allowed the robot to maintain higher lift above the granular medium, reducing drag
on the belly.

16

TABLE S1. Physical properties of the three granular media (in different compactions) for which resistive forces were measured.
*Angle of repose for 3 mm glass spheres courtesy of Sarah Sharpe.
particle diameter (mm) particle material density (g/cm3 )

granular medium
poppy seeds

0.7 ± 0.2

1.1

0.3 mm glass spheres

0.27 ± 0.04

2.5

3 mm glass spheres

3.2 ± 0.2

2.6

compaction
volume fraction angle of repose (◦ )
loosely packed (LP)
0.58
36
closely packed (CP)
0.62
47
loosely packed (LP)
0.58
25
closely packed (CP)
0.62
35
closely packed (CP)
0.63
21*

TABLE S2. Zeroth- and first-order Fourier coefficients M (in N/cm3 ) for all media tested. These coefficients are > 0.05A0,0 .
M0 is a generic coefficient curve to which the M for each granular medium can be collapsed onto by division of a scaling factor
ζ (ζ = 1 for M0 ). We choose the magnitudes of M0 such that for all media tested the values of ζ are nearly the same as the
values of αzfit (0, π/2) (this becomes useful later in the scaling routine). CP and LP indicates closely packed and loosely packed
states.
granular medium
poppy seeds
0.3 mm glass spheres 3 mm glass spheres generic coefficients
compaction
LP
CP
LP
CP
CP
n/a
matrix notation MpoppyLP MpoppyCP M0.3mmLP M0.3mmCP
M3mmCP
M0
A0,0
0.051
0.094
0.040
0.081
0.045
0.206
A1,0
0.047
0.092
0.030
0.063
0.031
0.169
B1,1
0.053
0.092
0.045
0.078
0.046
0.212
B0,1
0.083
0.151
0.077
0.133
0.084
0.358
B−1,1
0.020
0.035
0
0.024
0.012
0.055
C1,1
−0.026
−0.039
−0.031
−0.050
−0.031
−0.124
C0,1
0.057
0.086
0.066
0.087
0.060
0.253
C−1,1
0
0.018
0
0
0
0.007
D1,0
0.025
0.046
0.017
0.033
0.015
0.088
scaling factor ζ
0.248
0.488
0.194
0.371
0.214
1

TABLE S3. Comparison of the measurements and fits of maximal vertical stress per unit depth (in N/cm3 ) for all media
tested. CP and LP indicates closely packed and loosely packed states.
granular medium
poppy seeds 0.3 mm glass spheres 3 mm glass spheres
compaction
LP
CP
LP
CP
CP
αz (0, π/2)
0.35 0.56 0.24
0.40
0.29
αzfit (0, π/2)
0.26 0.47 0.19
0.38
0.22
χ = αz (0, π/2)/αzfit (0, π/2) 1.37 1.19 1.27
1.05
1.33

TABLE S4. Particle size distribution of the natural sands tested.
natural sand

particle diameter (mm) mass percentage (%)
< 0.06
2
Yuma sand
0.06–0.3
68
0.3–3.0
17
>3.0
13
< 0.3
5
0.3–0.6
36
29 Palms sand
0.6–0.7
55
0.7–3.0
3
>3.0
1
29 Palms sand (reduced polydispercity)
0.6–0.7
100

17
Movie S1
http://crablab.gatech.edu/pages/movies/files/
Terradyn_s1.mov
Plate element intrusion experiments. Left: Intrusion for representative attack angle and intrusion angle
(β, γ) = (π/6, π/4). Right: Extraction for representative
(β, γ) = −(π/6, π/4). Top: Videos of the plate moving in a granular medium (loosely packed poppy seeds).
Bottom: Vertical (σz , blue curve) and horizontal (σx ,
green curve) stresses versus depth |z|. Videos were taken
with the plate at the container boundary for illustration
purpose only. Forces were measured with the plate in
the middle of the container, far away from the boundary.
The red lines originating from the center of the top panels
indicate granular forces on the plate element. The plate
was moved at 1 cm/s. See Fig. 2, A and B for schematic
of the experiment and definition of variables.
Movie S2
http://crablab.gatech.edu/pages/movies/files/
Terradyn_s2.mov
Leg rotation experiments. Left: C-leg. Right: Reversed c-leg. Top: Videos of the leg rotating through a
granular medium (loosely packed poppy seeds). Bottom:
Net lift (σz , blue curve) and thrust (σx , green curve) versus leg angle θ. Videos were taken with the plate at the
container boundary for illustration purpose only. Forces
were measured with the plate in the middle of the container, far away from the boundary. The red lines originating from the center of the top panels indicate granular
forces on the model legs. The model legs were rotated
at 0.2 rad/s (leg tip speed ∼ 1 cm/s). Note that in the
c-leg video the axle deflected slightly during rotation—
this was an artifact due to the extra-long supporting rod
in order for the plate to reach the boundary for illustration purpose only. For force measurements performed
in the middle of the container, the supporting rod was
shorter and the axle did not deflect. See Fig. 3 A to C
for schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.
Movie S3
http://crablab.gatech.edu/pages/movies/files/
Terradyn_s3.mov
Leg rotation model calculations. Left: C-leg. Right:
Reversed c-leg. Top: Videos of the leg rotating through a
granular medium (loosely packed poppy seeds). Bottom:

Net lift (σz , blue curve) and thrust (σx , green curve)
versus leg angle θ. The thick red lines originating from
the center of the top panels indicate net forces on the
model legs. The thin red lines on the model legs indicate
element forces (on a larger scale). See Fig. 3 A to C for
schematic of the experiment and definition of variables.
Movie S4
http://crablab.gatech.edu/pages/movies/files/
Terradyn_s4.mov
Robot (body length = 13 cm, body mass m = 150
g) running on a granular medium (loosely packed poppy
seeds) using c-legs and stride frequency f = 5 Hz. Video
is played in real time.
Movie S5
http://crablab.gatech.edu/pages/movies/files/
Terradyn_s5.mov
Robot experiments. Top: Using c-legs (f = 2.0 Hz).
Middle: Using reversed c-legs (f = 2.2 Hz). Bottom:
Forward speed vx versus time t. Videos are played 5
times slower than real time. Note that in the trial using
reversed c-legs, the robot body orientation was reversed;
we verified that this did not affect robot kinematics and
speed (because the center of mass of the robot was tuned
to overlap with the geometric center of the body). See
Fig. 4 A for definition of variables.
Movie S6
http://crablab.gatech.edu/pages/movies/files/
Terradyn_s6.mov
Robot simulation. Top: Using c-legs (f = 2.0 Hz).
Middle: Using reversed c-legs (f = 2.2 Hz). Bottom:
Forward speed vx versus time t. Videos are played 5 times
slower than real time. The red and green arrows on the
two tripod of legs indicate the ground reaction forces on
the leg elements calculated from simulation. Note that
the forces on the body are not shown. See Fig. 4 A for
definition of variables.
Additional Data Table S5 (separate file in
Microsoft Excel format)
http://crablab.gatech.edu/pages/movies/files/
Terradyn_table_s5.xls
Original data of vertical (αz ) and horizontal (αx ) stresses
per unit depth versus attack angle β and intrusion angle
γ, for all media tested. These data were used to produce
Fig. 2, C and D and fig. S4.

