A scalable pipeline for designing
reconfigurable organisms
Sam Kriegmana,1, Douglas Blackistonb,c,1, Michael Levinb,c,d, and Josh Bongarda,2
a
Department of Computer Science, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405; bDepartment of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02153; cAllen
Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02153; and dWyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115

evolutionary computation

| artificial life | bioengineering

Downloaded by guest on January 14, 2020

M

ost modern technologies are constructed from synthetic
rather than living materials because the former have
proved easier to design, manufacture, and maintain; living systems exhibit robustness of structure and function and thus tend
to resist adopting the new behaviors imposed on them. However,
if living systems could be continuously and rapidly designed ab
initio and deployed to serve novel functions, their innate ability
to resist entropy might enable them to far surpass the useful
lifetimes of our strongest yet static technologies. As examples of
this resistance, embryonic development and regeneration reveal
remarkable plasticity, enabling cells or whole organ systems to
self-organize adaptive functionality despite drastic deformation
(1, 2). Exploiting the computational capacity of cells to function
in novel configurations suggests the possibility of creating synthetic morphology that achieves complex novel anatomies via the
benefits of both emergence and guided self-assembly (3).
Currently, there are several methods underway to design and build
bespoke living systems. Single-cell organisms have been modified by
refactored genomes, but such methods are not yet scalable to rational
control of multicellular shape or behavior (4). Synthetic organoids
can be made by exposing cells to specific culture conditions but very
limited control is available over their structure (and thus function)
because the outcome is largely emergent and not under the experimenter’s control (5). Conversely, bioengineering efforts with 3D
scaffolds provide improved control (6–8), but the inability to predict
behavioral impacts of arbitrary biological construction has restricted
assembly to biological machines that resemble existing organisms,
rather than discovering novel forms through automatic design.
Meanwhile, advances in computational search and 3D printing
have yielded scalable methods for designing and training machines in silico (9, 10) and then manufacturing physical instances
of them (11–13). Most of these approaches employ an evolutionary search method (14) that, unlike learning methods, enables the design of the machine’s physical structure along with its
behavior. These evolutionary design methods continually generate
diverse solutions to a given problem, which proves useful as some
designs can be instantiated physically better than others. Moreover, they are agnostic to the kind of artifact being designed and
the function it should provide: the same evolutionary algorithm
can be reconfigured to design drugs (15), autonomous machines
(11, 13), metamaterials (16), or architecture (17).

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1910837117

Here, we demonstrate a scalable approach for designing living
systems in silico using an evolutionary algorithm, and we show
how the evolved designs can be rapidly manufactured using a
cell-based construction toolkit. The approach is organized as a
linear pipeline that takes as input a description of the biological
building blocks to be used and the desired behavior the manufactured system should exhibit (Fig. 1). The pipeline continuously
outputs performant living systems that embody that behavior in
different ways. The resulting living systems are novel aggregates of
cells that yield novel functions: above the cellular level, they bear
little resemblance to existing organs or organisms.
Results
The pipeline is organized as a sequence of generators and filters
(SI Appendix, Fig. S1). The first generator is an evolutionary
algorithm that discovers different ways of combining the biological building blocks together to realize the desired behavior.
A population of random designs are first created. Then, each
design is simulated in a physics-based virtual environment and
automatically assigned a performance score. Less-performant
designs are deleted and overwritten by randomly modified copies
of more-performant designs. Repeating this process yields populations of performant and diverse designs (Fig. 2).
Significance
Most technologies are made from steel, concrete, chemicals, and
plastics, which degrade over time and can produce harmful
ecological and health side effects. It would thus be useful to
build technologies using self-renewing and biocompatible materials, of which the ideal candidates are living systems themselves. Thus, we here present a method that designs completely
biological machines from the ground up: computers automatically design new machines in simulation, and the best designs
are then built by combining together different biological tissues.
This suggests others may use this approach to design a variety of
living machines to safely deliver drugs inside the human body,
help with environmental remediation, or further broaden our
understanding of the diverse forms and functions life may
adopt.
Author contributions: S.K., D.B., M.L., and J.B. designed research; S.K. and D.B. performed
research; S.K. and D.B. analyzed data; and S.K., D.B., M.L., and J.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0
(CC BY).
Data deposition: The source code necessary for reproducing the computational results reported in this paper can be found at GitHub (https://github.com/skriegman/reconfigurable_
organisms).
1

S. K. and D. B. contributed equally to this work.

2

To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: josh.bongard@uvm.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.1910837117/-/DCSupplemental.

PNAS Latest Articles | 1 of 7

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY

Living systems are more robust, diverse, complex, and supportive
of human life than any technology yet created. However, our ability
to create novel lifeforms is currently limited to varying existing
organisms or bioengineering organoids in vitro. Here we show a
scalable pipeline for creating functional novel lifeforms: AI methods
automatically design diverse candidate lifeforms in silico to perform
some desired function, and transferable designs are then created
using a cell-based construction toolkit to realize living systems with
the predicted behaviors. Although some steps in this pipeline still
require manual intervention, complete automation in future would
pave the way to designing and deploying unique, bespoke living
systems for a wide range of functions.

COMPUTER SCIENCES

Edited by Terrence J. Sejnowski, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, and approved November 26, 2019 (received for review June 24, 2019)

Evolved designs in silico

A
2

Building
blocks

Realization in vivo

C

6

16

Run 6

D
B
GOAL

OUT

Run 52

E
52

G
Run 2

F

Run 16

Downloaded by guest on January 14, 2020

Fig. 1. Designing and manufacturing reconfigurable organisms. A behavioral goal (e.g., maximize displacement), along with structural building blocks [here, contractile (red) and passive (cyan) voxels], are supplied to an evolutionary algorithm. The algorithm evolves an initially random population and returns the best design
that was found. The algorithm is rerun 99 times starting with different random populations, generating a diversity of performant designs in silico (A; SI Appendix,
section S5). Performant designs are then filtered by their robustness to random phase modulation of their contractile cells (B; SI Appendix, section S7), constructed
in vivo using developing Xenopus cardiomyocyte and epidermal cell progenitors (C–F; SI Appendix, section S8), and placed on the surface of a Petri dish where their
behavior is observed and compared to the design’s predicted behavior (SI Appendix, section S9). Discrepancies between in silico and in vivo behavior are returned to
the evolutionary algorithm in the form of constraints on the kinds of designs that can evolve during subsequent design–manufacture cycles (G; SI Appendix, section
S6). Concurrently, tissue layering and shaping techniques are modified such that realized living systems behave more like their virtual model (SI Appendix, section S8).

As there are likely to be many differences between the simulated
and targeted physical environments, performant designs are passed
through a robustness filter which only allows passage of designs
that sustain the desired behavior in the face of noise (SI Appendix,
section S7). Previous work has shown that noise resistance in
simulation is a simple and effective predictor of whether a design
will maintain its behavior when instantiated physically (18).
The surviving noise-resistant designs are then passed through
a build filter (SI Appendix, Fig. S4) which removes designs that
are not suitable for the current build method (SI Appendix, Fig.
S6) or unlikely to scale to more complex tasks in future deployments. The manufacturability of a design depends on the
minimal concavity size that will persist in aggregations of developing
stem cells, which tend to close small gaps in their collective geometry
(SI Appendix, Fig. S7). The scalability of a design depends on its
proportion of passive tissue, which provides space for future
organ systems or payloads (SI Appendix, Fig. S13).
The designs that successfully pass through the build filter are
then built out of living tissues. Pluripotent stem cells are first
harvested from blastula stage Xenopus laevis embryos, dissociated,
and pooled to achieve the desired number of cells. Following an
incubation period, the aggregated tissue is then manually shaped
by subtraction using a combination of microsurgery forceps and a
13-μm wire tip cautery electrode, producing a biological approximation of the simulated design. Further, contractile tissue can be
layered into the organism through the harvesting and embedding
of Xenopus cardiac progenitor cells, an embryonically derived cell
type which naturally develops into cardiomyocytes (heart muscle)
and produces contractile waves at specific locations in the resultant shaped form (SI Appendix, Fig. S6).
The final product of this procedure is a living, 3D approximation
of the evolved design, which possesses the ability to self-locomote
2 of 7 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1910837117

and explore an aqueous environment for a period of days or weeks
without additional nutrients. These organisms are then deployed
into their physical environment, and resultant behavior, if any, is
observed (Fig. 3). Behaviors are then compared against those predicted by their simulated counterparts to determine whether or how
well behaviors transferred from silico to vivo (Fig. 4).
After several organisms have been deployed and observed, it is
likely that they exhibit varying amounts of the desired behavior.
Common patterns among the successful systems are distilled down
into constraints and supplied back to the evolutionary algorithm,
which now evolves designs that are not just performant but also
conform to the constraints (SI Appendix, section S6). This increases the success likelihood of subsequent design-to-deployment
attempts.
Reconfigurable organisms were evolved to exhibit four different
behaviors: locomotion, object manipulation, object transport, and
collective behavior (SI Appendix, section S10). To achieve this, the
pipeline was employed four times.
Locomotion. To obtain a diverse population of designs, 100 independent trials of the evolutionary algorithm were conducted
(Fig. 2 A–C), each starting from a different set of initial random
designs. During each trial, designs were selected based on net
displacement achieved during a 10-s period (with randomized,
phase-modulated contraction, cycling at 2 Hz). Additional selection pressures were applied to maintain diversity by inducing
competition within and between unique genetic lineages within
each trial (19), yielding unique ecological dynamics (SI Appendix,
section S5). The most fit designs at the end of each trial were
extracted (Fig. 1A) and passed through the robustness and build
filters (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). During this filtering process, buildable and scalable designs that retain rapid locomotion during
Kriegman et al.

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Fig. 2. Designing reconfigurable organisms. For a given goal, 100 independent evolutionary trials were conducted in silico (A–C). Each colored line represents the
velocity of the fastest-moving design within its clade. Each genome (D) dictates anatomy and behavior by determining where and how voxels are combined, and whether
they are passive (cyan) or contractile (red; E). Genomes simulate a developmental process and are described in more detail in SI Appendix, section S4. The differing
behavioral traces produced by a design (F) are a result of randomly perturbing the actuation of each contractile cell during each evaluation period. The behavioral traces
all originate from the same position (blue) but diverge over time until their final destination (red). (G) During one evaluation period, after settling under gravity for 1 s,
compressed and expanded contractile voxels are shown in red and green, respectively. Because the genotype is scale-free, the anatomical resolution of any design can be
increased (H) while preserving geometry (but not necessarily behavior). When all evolutionary trials complete, the most performant design from each trial is extracted (I).
The robust design passed to the next stage of the pipeline moves, on average, more rapidly (red curve) than the average speed of the other 99 designs (gray curve).

Downloaded by guest on January 14, 2020

random perturbations are selected for manufacture (Fig. 3 and SI
Appendix, Fig. S6).
Cilia, which produce locomotion through metachronal waves
(the generation of sequential and directional propagating waves,
as opposed to synchronized beating), were not modeled in silico
and were suppressed in vivo through embryonic microinjection
of mRNA transcribing the Notch intracellular domain (Notch
ICD) (20). Thus, any displacement results from contractile cardiac muscle tissue that pushes against the surface of the dish.
This simplifies the simulation and its comparison to the realized
organism. Trajectories of deciliated designs are compared in
silico and in vivo, in two orientations (upright and inverted 180°
about the transverse plane) thus isolating the impact of the
designed morphology on the difference between predicted and
realized behavior. For at least one design, the data suggest that
the desired behavior successfully transferred when it was upright
but not when inverted (Fig. 4). More specifically, the upright
organisms’ direction of movement matched that of the in silico
design under random perturbations (P < 0.01; details in SI Appendix, section S9), and inverting the design significantly reduced
its net displacement both in silico (P < 0.001) and in vivo (P <
0.0001). This suggests that successful transference did not result
by chance but rather was due to the design itself.
Object Manipulation. When the environment is strewn with particulate matter, motile designs spontaneously aggregate the external objects both in silico (SI Appendix, Fig. S10) and in vivo
(Fig. 3F and SI Appendix, Fig. S11). More precise object manipulation can be selected for an explicit goal, such as specifying
target areas from which debris should be cleared, or target objects to discard. The latter goal was implemented and primitive
end-effectors evolved in simulation (SI Appendix, Fig. S12).
Kriegman et al.

Object Transport. Some designs evolved for displacement reduced

hydrodynamic drag (SI Appendix, section S6) via a hole through
the center of their transverse plane. This more complex topology
was realized in vivo (SI Appendix, Fig. S13) but was not layered
with contractile tissue. In simulation, this emergent feature can
be exapted as a pouch to store and transport objects. In a subsequent round of evolution, pouches were explicitly incorporated
as a design constraint, and the new goal of maximizing the distance of the carried object was employed. This yielded evolved
object transport in silico (SI Appendix, Fig. S13).
Collective Behavior. Multiple designs can be placed in the same
environment, yielding collective behavior (21) (SI Appendix, Figs.
S10 and S11). Several such behaviors predicted in silico were
observed in vivo. For instance, two designs often collide, form a
temporary mechanical bond, and orbit about each other for several revolutions before detaching along tangential trajectories (SI
Appendix, Fig. S10). This phenomenon is more pronounced when
cilia are not inhibited on the organisms: individuals frequently
become entangled with their neighbors, often changing partners
across an observation (Fig. 3F and SI Appendix, Fig. S11).

Discussion
Although simulation and design of rigid structures and machines
has been possible for some time, only recently has it become
computationally tractable to simulate the combined behavior of
arbitrary aggregates of soft components with differing material
and actuation properties (22). As shown here, such fine-grained
simulations can be embedded in evolutionary search methods to
discover designs that can be instantiated in biological rather than
artificial materials.
The resulting organisms embodied not only the structure (SI
Appendix, Fig. S8) of evolved in silico designs but also their behavior
PNAS Latest Articles | 3 of 7

COMPUTER SCIENCES

B

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY

A

Downloaded by guest on January 14, 2020

Fig. 3. Manufacturing reconfigurable organisms. (A) Aggregation of pluripotent blastula cells harvested from X. laevis embryos. (B) Shaping results in 3D representations of the evolved in silico designs. (C) Layering of cardiac progenitor cells results in contractile cardiomyocyte tissue at specific locations, visualized by red fluorescent
lineage tracer. (D) Time-lapse imaging of self-locomotion in an aqueous environment. (E) Emergent behavior of debris aggregation by an individual within the environment and (F) by groups of reconfigurable organisms over a 24-h period (SI Appendix, section S10.4). (Scale bars: 500 μm for A–E and 5 mm for F, respectively.)

4 of 7 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1910837117

Kriegman et al.

ectoderm

D

B

E

Run 52

A

cardiac

in vivo

Upright

Y position (body lengths)

C

in silico

in silico

F

in vivo

Inverted

in silico

Downloaded by guest on January 14, 2020

Fig. 4. Transferal from silico to vivo. The first design selected for fabrication and specific hypothesis testing (A) was the most robust yet stable and energyefficient configuration of passive (epidermis; green) and contractile (cardiac; red) tissues found by the evolutionary algorithm. The design was evaluated 25
times for 1 min of simulation time, resulting in 25 movement trajectories (pink curves in C). Six reconfigurable organisms were built which embodied this
design (e.g., B) (SI Appendix, section S9). Three were evaluated four times and the other three were evaluated five times for 10 min each (27 blue curves in C).
The organisms’ direction of movement matched the design’s predicted direction of movement (P < 0.01; details in SI Appendix, section S9). To determine
whether the organisms’ movement was a result of chance or due to the design’s evolved geometry and tissue placement, geometry and tissue distribution
was altered by rotating the design 180° about its transverse plane (D) and evaluating it another 25 times in silico (pink curves in F). Each of the six organisms
were likewise inverted (E): four were evaluated five times while the remaining two were only evaluated once (22 blue curves in F). Inverting the design
significantly reduces its net displacement (P < 0.001), as did inverting the organisms (P < 0.0001).

(Fig. 4), despite modeling cardiomyocyte temporal coordination as
random noise. As a side effect of selection pressure for locomotion,
derandomizing morphologies evolved: evolutionary improvement
occurred through changes in overall shape, and distribution of the
passive and contractile cells, to collectively derandomize the global
movement produced by the random actuation. In biology, such
robustness to random noise is ubiquitous; one example is the ability
of many species to adapt to wide ranges of diversity in cell size and
number as starting points in their embryogenesis (23).
The behavioral competence of individual cells, and the propensity of cells to cooperate in groups, facilitate functional morphogenesis in novel circumstances. The lifeforms presented here,
despite lacking nervous systems, following novel developmental
trajectories, and being composed of materials from different tissues, nevertheless possess these self-organizing properties. These
properties synergize with and support the behavior they were
designed to exhibit. For instance, although signaling between
cardiomyocytes was not enforced, emergent spontaneous coordination among the cardiac muscle cells produced coherent,
phase-matched contractions which aided locomotion in the physically realized designs. Also, some of the designs, when combined,
spontaneously and collectively aggregate detritus littered within
their shared environment (Fig. 3F and SI Appendix, Fig. S11).
Finally, reconfigurable organisms not only self-maintain their externally imposed configuration, but they also self-repair in the face
of damage, such as automatically closing lacerations (SI Appendix,
Fig. S9). Such spontaneous behavior cannot be expected from
machines built with artificial materials unless that behavior was
explicitly selected for during the design process (24).
This approach admits future generalization and automation
because the generator-and-filter architecture enables modular
addition, removal, or reorganization of elements in the pipeline
for rapid design and deployment of new living systems for new
tasks in new domains. For instance, a filter could be added which
Kriegman et al.

preemptively steers the evolutionary algorithm away from portions of the design space known to contain designs that cannot be
realized physically (25). Or, inspired by the hierarchical organization of deep neural networks (26), individual designs output by
one generator could become the building blocks input to the next
generator, thus enabling hierarchical design and reuse of cellular
assemblies, and assemblies of assemblies.
Beyond the applications reported here, the generality of this
approach is as of yet unknown. But, advances in machine learning,
soft body simulation, and bioprinting are likely to broaden the
potential applications to which it may be put in the future. Applications could be numerous, given the ease of misexpressing
novel proteins and synthetic biology pathways and computational
circuits in Xenopus cells (27). Given their nontoxicity and selflimiting lifespan, they could serve as a novel vehicle for intelligent
drug delivery (28) or internal surgery (29). If equipped to express
signaling circuits and proteins for enzymatic, sensory (receptor),
and mechanical deformation functions, they could seek out and
digest toxic or waste products, or identify molecules of interest in
environments physically inaccessible to robots. If equipped with
reproductive systems (by exploiting endogenous regenerative
mechanisms such as occurs in planarian fissioning), they may be
capable of doing so at scale. In biomedical settings, one could envision such biobots (made from the patient’s own cells) removing
plaque from artery walls, identifying cancer, or settling down to
differentiate or control events in locations of disease. A beneficial
safety feature of such constructions is that in the absence of specific
metabolic engineering, they have a naturally limited lifespan.
These methods, reagents, and data extend the breadth of model
organisms available for study by designing living systems that are
as orthogonal as possible to existing species, yet capable of being
built from existing cell types. By enabling a computationally
guided interplay between emergent and designed processes, this
platform facilitates studies of the relationship between genomes
PNAS Latest Articles | 5 of 7

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY

X position (body lengths)

COMPUTER SCIENCES

in vivo

(in our case, wild-type X. laevis), the resulting body plan, and its
behaviors in diverse environments. Thus, reconfigurable organisms could serve as a unique model system facilitating work in the
evolution of multicellularity, exobiology, artificial life, basal cognition, and regenerative medicine. If equipped with electrically
active cells and selected for cognitive or computational functions
(30), such designed systems may similarly broaden our understanding of how intelligence can be instantiated in living as well as
nonliving systems.
Materials and Methods
Evolutionary Design. Designs (SI Appendix, section S2) were evolved inside a
physics engine (SI Appendix, section S3) as reconfigurable aggregations of
passive and contractile voxels (Fig. 1). On the first pass through the pipeline
using the goal behavior of locomotion, we simulated designs on land and
allowed the evolutionary process to finely tune their actuation. This resulted
in highly performant but nontransferable designs (SI Appendix, Fig. S2) with
powerful, bounding gaits that are not obtainable in vivo with the current
build method (SI Appendix, section S8). These gaits were characterized by
timeframes (on average, 47% of the gait cycle) in which no part of the in
silico design was in contact with the simulated ground plane. In vivo, however, the deciliated organisms always kept part of their ventral surfaces in
contact with the surface of the dish due to negative buoyancy.
These discrepancies were rectified by adding constraints into the pipeline
in the form of adjustments to environmental and actuation settings, which
were altered as follows. On the second pass, the fidelity of the simulated
environment was increased by incorporating first-order hydrodynamics: the
modified environment consisted of an infinite plane submerged in water,
which was approximated by decreasing the coefficient of gravitational acceleration (increasing buoyancy) and applying a drag force to each voxel face
on the design’s surface (SI Appendix, section S6).
Secondly, actuation was randomized: contractile cells were revised to have
random phase offsets from a central pattern generator (a sine wave with
frequency 2 Hz). More specifically, each voxel of a randomly configured design
(one of which was injected into the population at each generation; SI Appendix,
section S5) was assigned a random phase offset, which was held fixed in its
descendants (the entire clade). Mutations switched each voxel to be either
present or absent, and, if present, either passive or active (contractile), but the
original phase offset, at every location in the workspace, was hardcoded. This
reduced the dependence on precisely timed excitation, and promoted the
discovery of more robust mechanical structures (SI Appendix, Fig. S3).
The behavior of designs generated on the second pass better matched the
behavior of the actual living systems: on average, designs were in contact
with the ground plane for 93.3% of their evaluation period, compared to just
52.7% on the first pass (SI Appendix, section S6).

Downloaded by guest on January 14, 2020

Robustness Filter. The most performant designs (Fig. 1A) were sorted by their
robustness to random perturbations in their actuation. Phase offsets stored in
the genotype were mutated by adding a number that was drawn randomly
from a normal distribution with mean zero and SD s = 0.4π (which is 40% of
the −π/2 to π/2 range of valid phase-offset values). This hyperparameter was
selected to be large enough to scramble the original phase-offset value without
being so large as to push all mutations up against the ±π/2 bounds. Designs that
maintained the highest average performance across this actuation noise were
passed, one by one, in order of their robustness ranking, to the build filter.
Build Filter. The most robust designs are evaluated by their manufacturability
under the current build method, which layers contiguous tissue regions sequentially (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). The minimal concavity was examined by
producing organisms with progressively smaller shape deformations, then
determining which persist across the lifespan of the organism, and which
close due to tissue contraction, leading to loss of concavity. Preliminary work
determined that concavities with a width of 100 μm or greater (12% of total
body length) produced stable long-term deformations suitable for biological
building (SI Appendix, Fig. S7).
Additionally, the build filter removes designs that are more than 50%
muscle, in order to reserve sufficient design space to add specialized cells for
purposes other than locomotion, including sensory input, metabolism,
memory, biosensors, etc. Also, contractile tissue incurs a much higher metabolic cost compared to nonmuscle tissue (the human heart consumes ∼1 mM
ATP per second; ref. 31). Thus, limiting this tissue type increases the total
lifetime of transferred designs. The most robust designs that satisfy these
selection criteria (SI Appendix, Fig. S4) are passed through the build filter to
the next stage of the pipeline: the realizability generator.

6 of 7 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1910837117

Realizability Generator. Reconfigurable organisms were created using Xenopus
embryos as donor tissue under methods approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee and Tufts University Department of Laboratory
Animal Medicine under protocol number M2017-53.
Fertilized X. laevis eggs were reared in a 0.1×, pH 7.8, Marc’s Modified
Ringers solution (MMR) using standard protocols and staged according to
Nieuwkoop and Faber (32, 33). For shaping experiments, animal caps were
manually cut at St. 9 using surgery forceps (Dumont, 11241–30 #4) and
transferred to calcium- and magnesium-free medium for 5 min (50.3 mM
NaCl, 0.7 mM KCl, 9.2 mM Na2HPO4, 0.9 mM KH2PO4, 2.4 mM NaHCO3, 1.0 mM
edetic acid [EDTA], pH 7.3). The outer ectoderm layer was manually
removed and discarded, while the inner layer was agitated until fully
dissociated (cells are this stage are largely pluripotent, but differentiate
into ectoderm without further intervention). Material from five animal
caps was pooled and transferred to a welled dish containing 0.75× MMR.
After 24 h at 14 °C, the spherical reaggregate was moved to a clean 1%
agarose-coated dish containing 10 mL 0.75× MMR and 5 μl gentamicin
(ThermoFisher Scientific, 15710072). Forty-eight hours after tissue reaggregation the resulting tissue (now fated to become specific epidermal
cell lineages including ionocytes, small secretory cells, and goblet cells),
was shaped using a combination of microsurgery forceps and a MC-2010
microcautery instrument with 13-μm wire electrodes (Protech International Inc., MC-2010, 13-Y1 wire tip cautery electrode). Tissue was reshaped
as necessary for 3 h to create the desired anatomical outcome, after which it
was moved to a clean 1% agarose-coated dish containing 10 mL 0.75× MMR
and 5 μl gentamicin and raised at 14 °C.
For contractile movement experiments, cohorts of Xenopus embryos
were microinjected with one of two synthetic mRNAs at the four-cell stage
using standard protocols (32). mRNA for the fluorescent lineage tracer
tdTomato (34) and the multiciliated cell inhibitor Notch ICD (20, 35) was
synthesized using mMESSAGE transcription kits (ThermoFisher Scientific,
AM1340). Injections were performed in 3% Ficoll solution using a pulled
capillary to deliver 370 pg of mRNA for each transcript to all four cells.
tdTomato microinjected embryos were reared for at 22 °C while Notch ICD
injected embryos were reared at 14 °C. Twenty-four hours after injection,
stage 10 Notch ICD injected embryos were moved to a 1% agarose-coated
Petri dish containing 0.75× MMR, and animal caps were manually cut using
surgery forceps as above. In addition, stage 23–24 tdTomato injected
embryos were transferred to the same dish and the presumptive heart
field was excised with the outer layer of ectoderm then removed and
discarded. Presumptive heart tissue was then placed between two Notch
ICD injected animal caps, and the three layers were allowed to heal for 1 h
at 22 °C. Following healing, the tissue was moved to clean 1% agarosecoated dish containing 10 mL 0.75× MMR and 5 μl gentamicin and raised at
14 °C. For shaping, resultant tissue was sculpted as above using a combination of microsurgery forceps and a MC-2010 microcautery instrument.
Transferability Filter. All samples were imaged live in 0.75× MMR at 20 °C using
a Nikon SMZ-1500 microscope equipped with both top and substage illumination. Still images were captured on a QImaging Retiga 2000R CCD camera
and videos were captured using a Sony IMX234 at a sample rate of 30 frames
per second. XY movement tracks were extracted for each run using Noldus
Ethovision 14 software, and smoothed using a one-dimensional Gaussian filter
(SI Appendix, section S9.1). The tdTomato lineage tracer was imaged using a
standard tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC) filter cube and fluorescent light source to verify cardiac muscle cell location, and GFPIII signal was
imaged with a standard fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) filter cube to verify
epidermal cell location (SI Appendix, section S9.2).
Data Availability. The source code necessary for reproducing the computational results reported in this paper can be found at GitHub (36).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This research was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Cooperative Agreement
Number HR0011-18-2-0022, the Lifelong Learning Machines program from
DARPA/MTO. The content of the information does not necessarily reflect the
position or the policy of the government, and no official endorsement
should be inferred. Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
This research was also supported by the Allen Discovery Center program
through The Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group (12171), and M.L. gratefully acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation’s Emergent Behaviors of Integrated Cellular Systems Grant (Subaward CBET-0939511). This
research was also supported by the National Science Foundation’s Emerging
Frontiers in Research and Innovation (EFRI) Continuum, Compliant, and Configurable Soft Robotics Engineering (C3 SoRo) program (Subaward EFMA1830870). We thank the Vermont Advanced Computing Core for the provided computational resources.

Kriegman et al.

Downloaded by guest on January 14, 2020

Kriegman et al.

PNAS Latest Articles | 7 of 7

COMPUTER SCIENCES

20. G. A. Deblandre, D. A. Wettstein, N. Koyano-Nakagawa, C. Kintner, A two-step
mechanism generates the spacing pattern of the ciliated cells in the skin of Xenopus
embryos. Development 126, 4715–4728 (1999).
21. J. Werfel, K. Petersen, R. Nagpal, Designing collective behavior in a termite-inspired
robot construction team. Science 343, 754–758 (2014).
22. J. Hiller, H. Lipson, Dynamic simulation of soft multimaterial 3d-printed objects. Soft
Robot. 1, 88–101 (2014).
23. J. Cooke, Scale of body pattern adjusts to available cell number in amphibian embryos. Nature 290, 775–778 (1981).
24. S. Kriegman, S. Walker, D. Shah, M. Levin, R. Kramer-Bottiglio, J. Bongard, Automated
shapeshifting for function recovery in damaged robots. Proc. Rob. Sci. Syst. (2019).
25. S. Koos, J. B. Mouret, S. Doncieux, The transferability approach: Crossing the reality
gap in evolutionary robotics. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 17, 122–145 (2013).
26. M. D. Zeiler, R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks” in
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, D. Fleet, T. Pajdla,
B. Schiele, T. Tuytelaars, Eds. (Springer, 2014), pp. 818–833.
27. S. Toda, L. R. Blauch, S. K. Y. Tang, L. Morsut, W. A. Lim, Programming self-organizing
multicellular structures with synthetic cell-cell signaling. Science 361, 156–162 (2018).
28. D. Patra et al., Intelligent, self-powered, drug delivery systems. Nanoscale 5, 1273–
1283 (2013).
29. J. Li, B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila, W. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Micro/nanorobots for
biomedicine: Delivery, surgery, sensing, and detoxification. Sci. Rob. 2, eaam6431
(2017).
30. F. Baluška, M. Levin, On having no head: Cognition throughout biological systems.
Front. Psychol. 7, 902 (2016).
31. J. Piquereau, R. Ventura-Clapier, Maturation of cardiac energy metabolism during
perinatal development. Front. Physiol. 9, 959 (2018).
32. P. D. Nieuwkoop, J. Faber, Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin) (North Holland
Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1956).
33. H. L. Sive, R. M. Grainger, R. M. Harland, Early Development of Xenopus laevis (CSHL
Press, 2000).
34. C. Waldner, M. Roose, G. U. Ryffel, Red fluorescent Xenopus laevis: A new tool for
grafting analysis. BMC Dev. Biol. 9, 37 (2009).
35. C. W. Beck, J. M. Slack, A developmental pathway controlling outgrowth of the
Xenopus tail bud. Development 126, 1611–1620 (1999).
36. S. Kriegman, D. Blackiston, M. Levin, J. Bongard, Data from “A scalable pipeline for
designing reconfigurable organisms.” GitHub. https://github.com/skriegman/
reconfigurable_organisms. Deposited 2 October 2019.

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY

1. D. J. Blackiston, M. Levin, Ectopic eyes outside the head in Xenopus tadpoles provide
sensory data for light-mediated learning. J. Exp. Biol. 216, 1031–1040 (2013).
2. L. N. Vandenberg, D. S. Adams, M. Levin, Normalized shape and location of perturbed
craniofacial structures in the Xenopus tadpole reveal an innate ability to achieve
correct morphology. Dev. Dyn. 241, 863–878 (2012).
3. R. D. Kamm et al., Perspective: The promise of multi-cellular engineered living systems. APL Bioeng 2, 040901 (2018).
4. C. A. Hutchison, III et al., Design and synthesis of a minimal bacterial genome. Science
351, aad6253 (2016).
5. Y. Sasai, M. Eiraku, H. Suga, In vitro organogenesis in three dimensions: Selforganising stem cells. Development 139, 4111–4121 (2012).
6. S. J. Park et al., Phototactic guidance of a tissue-engineered soft-robotic ray. Science
353, 158–162 (2016).
7. M. D. Tang-Schomer et al., Bioengineered functional brain-like cortical tissue. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 13811–13816 (2014).
8. J. C. Nawroth et al., A tissue-engineered jellyfish with biomimetic propulsion. Nat.
Biotechnol. 30, 792–797 (2012).
9. K. Sims, Evolving 3D morphology and behavior by competition. Artif. Life 1, 353–372
(1994).
10. N. Cheney, J. Bongard, V. SunSpiral, H. Lipson, Scalable co-optimization of morphology and control in embodied machines. J. R. Soc. Interface 15, 20170937 (2018).
11. H. Lipson, J. B. Pollack, Automatic design and manufacture of robotic lifeforms. Nature 406, 974–978 (2000).
12. J. Bongard, V. Zykov, H. Lipson, Resilient machines through continuous self-modeling.
Science 314, 1118–1121 (2006).
13. D. Cellucci, R. MacCurdy, H. Lipson, S. Risi, 1D printing of recyclable robots. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2, 1964–1971 (2017).
14. D. J. Munk, G. A. Vio, G. P. Steven, Topology and shape optimization methods using
evolutionary algorithms: A review. Struct. Multidiscipl. Optim. 52, 613–631 (2015).
15. R. V. Devi, S. S. Sathya, M. S. Coumar, Evolutionary algorithms for de novo drug design–A survey. Appl. Soft Comput. 27, 543–552 (2015).
16. M. D. Huntington, L. J. Lauhon, T. W. Odom, Subwavelength lattice optics by evolutionary design. Nano Lett. 14, 7195–7200 (2014).
17. C. T. Mueller, J. A. Ochsendorf, Combining structural performance and designer
preferences in evolutionary design space exploration. Autom. Constr. 52, 70–82
(2015).
18. N. Jakobi, Evolutionary robotics and the radical envelope-of-noise hypothesis. Adapt.
Behav. 6, 325–368 (1997).
19. M. Schmidt, H. Lipson, “Age-fitness pareto optimization” in Genetic Programming
Theory and Practice VIII (Springer, 2011), pp. 129–146.

